-----------

### Introduction to AD

------------

- Active Directory (AD) is a directory service for Windows network environments. It is a distributed, hierarchical structure that allows for centralized management of an organization's resources, including users, computers, groups, network devices, file shares, group policies, devices, and trusts.AD provides authentication and authorization functions within a Windows domain environment.
- AD is essentially a sizeable read-only database accessible to all users within the domain, regardless of their privilege level. A basic AD user account with no added privileges can enumerate most objects within AD. This fact makes it extremely important to properly secure an AD implementation because ANY user account, regardless of their privilege level, can be used to enumerate the domain and hunt for misconfigurations and flaws thoroughly. Also, multiple attacks can be performed with only a standard domain user account, showing the importance of a defense-in-depth strategy and careful planning focusing on security and hardening AD, network segmentation, and least privilege.
- A directory service such as Active Directory Domain Services(AD DS) gives an organization ways to store directory data and make it available to both standard users and administrators on the same network.AD DS stores information such as usernames and passwords and manages the rights needed for authorized users to access this information. It was first shipped with Windows Server 2000; it has come under increasing attack in recent years. It is designed to be backward-compatible, and many features are arguably not "secure by default." It is difficult to manage properly, especially in large environments where it can be easily misconfigured.
- Active Directory flaws and misconfigurations can often be used to obtain a foothold (internal access), move laterally and vertically within a network, and gain unauthorized access to protected resources such as databases, file shares, source code, and more.
- AD is arranged in hierarchical structure with the `forest` at the top with a number of `domains` which in turn can contain `nested subdomains`.A domain is a structure within which objects( users,computers and groups) are accessible.It has many built-in Organizational Units (OUs), such as Domain Controllers, Users, Computers, and new OUs can be created as required. OUs may contain objects and sub-OUs, allowing for the assignment of different group policies.
- Example-:

```
INLANEFREIGHT.LOCAL/
├── ADMIN.INLANEFREIGHT.LOCAL
│   ├── GPOs
│   └── OU
│       └── EMPLOYEES
│           ├── COMPUTERS
│           │   └── FILE01
│           ├── GROUPS
│           │   └── HQ Staff
│           └── USERS
│               └── barbara.jones
├── CORP.INLANEFREIGHT.LOCAL
└── DEV.INLANEFREIGHT.LOCAL
```

- Here we could say that INLANEFREIGHT.LOCAL is the root domain and contains the subdomains (either child or tree root domains) ADMIN.INLANEFREIGHT.LOCAL, CORP.INLANEFREIGHT.LOCAL, and DEV.INLANEFREIGHT.LOCAL as well as the other objects that make up a domain such as users, groups, computers, and more as we will see in detail below. It is common to see multiple domains (or forests) linked together via trust relationships in organizations that perform a lot of acquisitions. It is often quicker and easier to create a trust relationship with another domain/forest than recreate all new users in the current domain.


-----------------

### Active Directory Terminology

-----------------

- Object can be regarded as any directory in an Active Directory e.g user,groups, OUS, printer, domain controllers etc
- Attributes refer to a set of attributes and characteristics for a defined object. A computer object contains attributes such as the hostname and DNS name. All attributes in AD have an associated LDAP name that can be used when performing LDAP queries, such as displayName for Full Name and given name for First Name.
- Schema refers to the entire blueprint of the entire Active Directory.It defines what types of objects can exist in the AD database and their associated attributes. It lists definitions corresponding to AD objects and holds information about each object. For example, users in AD belong to the class "user," and computer objects to "computer," and so on. Each object has its own information (some required to be set and others optional) that are stored in Attributes. When an object is created from a class, this is called instantiation, and an object created from a specific class is called an instance of that class.
- A Domain is a logical group of objects e.g users,printer, OUs and groups.
- A Forest is a s a collection of Active Directory domains. It is the topmost container and contains all of the AD objects introduced below, including but not limited to domains, users, groups, computers, and Group Policy objects. A forest can contain one or multiple domains and be thought of as a state in the US or a country within the EU. Each forest operates independently but may have various trust relationships with other forests.
- A tree is a collection of Active Directory Domains that starts at a single root domain.A forest is a collection of AD trees.Each domain in a tree shares a boundary with the other domains. A parent-child trust relationship is formed when a domain is added under another domain in a tree. Two trees in the same forest cannot share a name (namespace). Let's say we have two trees in an AD forest: inlanefreight.local and ilfreight.local. A child domain of the first would be corp.inlanefreight.local while a child domain of the second could be corp.ilfreight.local. All domains in a tree share a standard Global Catalog which contains all information about objects that belong to the tree.
- Container objects hold other objects and have a defined place in the directory subtree hierarchy.
- Leaf objects do not contain other objects and are found at the end of the subtree hierarchy.

----------------

### GIDS

----------------

- GUID is a 128-bit value that is assigned to an object as soon as it is created.The GUID is stored in the ObjectGUID attribute. When querying for an AD object (such as a user, group, computer, domain, domain controller, etc.), we can query for its objectGUID value using PowerShell or search for it by specifying its distinguished name, GUID, SID, or SAM account name. The ObjectGUID property never changes and is associated with the object for as long as that object exists in the domain.
- Security principals re anything that the operating system can authenticate, including users, computer accounts, or even threads/processes that run in the context of a user or computer account (i.e., an application such as Tomcat running in the context of a service account within the domain). In AD, security principals are domain objects that can manage access to other resources within the domain. We can also have local user accounts and security groups used to control access to resources on only that specific computer. They are managed by the Security Accounts Manager
- A security identifier, or SID is used as a unique identifier for a security principal or security group. Every account, group, or process has its own unique SID, which, in an AD environment, is issued by the domain controller and stored in a secure database. A SID can only be used once. Even if the security principle is deleted, it can never be used again in that environment to identify another user or group. When a user logs in, the system creates an access token for them which contains the user's SID, the rights they have been granted, and the SIDs for any groups that the user is a member of. This token is used to check rights whenever the user performs an action on the computer.
- A Distinguished Name (DN) describes the full path to an object in AD (such as cn=bjones, ou=IT, ou=Employees, dc=inlanefreight, dc=local). In this example, the user bjones works in the IT department of the company Inlanefreight, and his account is created in an Organizational Unit (OU) that holds accounts for company employees. The Common Name (CN) bjones is just one way the user object could be searched for or accessed within the domain.
- A Relative Distinguished Name (RDN) is a single component of the Distinguished Name that identifies the object as unique from other objects at the current level in the naming hierarchy. In our example, bjones is the Relative Distinguished Name of the object. AD does not allow two objects with the same name under the same parent container, but there can be two objects with the same RDNs that are still unique in the domain because they have different DNs. e.g The object cn=bjones,dc=dev,dc=inlanefreight,dc=local would be recognized as different from cn=bjones,dc=inlanefreight,dc=local.

- The sAMAccountName is the user's logon name. Here it would just be bjones. It must be a unique value and 20 or fewer characters.
- The userPrincipalName attribute is another way to identify users in AD. This attribute consists of a prefix (the user account name) and a suffix (the domain name) in the format of bjones@inlanefreight.local. This attribute is not mandatory.
- Fsmo roles-: In the early days of AD, if you had multiple DCs in an environment, they would fight over which DC gets to make changes, and sometimes changes would not be made properly. Microsoft then implemented "last writer wins," which could introduce its own problems if the last change breaks things.They then introduced a model in which a single "master" DC could apply changes to the domain while the others merely fulfilled authentication requests. This was a flawed design because if the master DC went down, no changes could be made to the environment until it was restored. To resolve this single point of failure model, Microsoft separated the various responsibilities that a DC can have into Flexible Single Master Operation (FSMO) roles. These give Domain Controllers (DC) the ability to continue authenticating users and granting permissions without interruption (authorization and authentication).here are five FSMO roles: Schema Master and Domain Naming Master (one of each per forest), Relative ID (RID) Master (one per domain), Primary Domain Controller (PDC) Emulator (one per domain), and Infrastructure Master (one per domain). All five roles are assigned to the first DC in the forest root domain in a new AD forest. Each time a new domain is added to a forest, only the RID Master, PDC Emulator, and Infrastructure Master roles are assigned to the new domain. FSMO roles are typically set when domain controllers are created, but sysadmins can transfer these roles if needed. These roles help replication in AD to run smoothly and ensure that critical services are operating correctly. We will walk through each of these roles in detail later in this section.
- Global Catalog is a domain controller that stores copies of ALL objects in an Active Directory forest. The GC stores a full copy of all objects in the current domain and a partial copy of objects that belong to other domains in the forest. Standard domain controllers hold a complete replica of objects belonging to its domain but not those of different domains in the forest. The GC allows both users and applications to find information about any objects in ANY domain in the forest.It is responsible for authorization and object searching with an attribute.
- Read ONly Domain Controller-: It has a read-only Active Directory database. No AD account passwords are cached on an RODC (other than the RODC computer account & RODC KRBTGT passwords.) No changes are pushed out via an RODC's AD database, SYSVOL, or DNS. RODCs also include a read-only DNS server, allow for administrator role separation, reduce replication traffic in the environment, and prevent SYSVOL modifications from being replicated to other DCs.
- Replication happens in AD when AD objects are updated and transferred from one Domain Controller to another. Whenever a DC is added, connection objects are created to manage replication between them. These connections are made by the Knowledge Consistency Checker (KCC) service, which is present on all DCs. Replication ensures that changes are synchronized with all other DCs in a forest, helping to create a backup in case one domain controller fails.
- A Service Principal Name (SPN) uniquely identifies a service instance. They are used by Kerberos authentication to associate an instance of a service with a logon account, allowing a client application to request the service to authenticate an account without needing to know the account name.
- Group Policy Objects (GPOs) are virtual collections of policy settings. Each GPO has a unique GUID. A GPO can contain local file system settings or Active Directory settings. GPO settings can be applied to both user and computer objects. They can be applied to all users and computers within the domain or defined more granularly at the OU level.
- An Access Control List (ACL) is the ordered collection of Access Control Entries (ACEs) that apply to an object
- Each Access Control Entry (ACE) in an ACL identifies a trustee (user account, group account, or logon session) and lists the access rights that are allowed, denied, or audited for the given trustee
- Discretionary Access Control List (DACL)-: DACLs define which security principles are granted or denied access to an object; it contains a list of ACEs. When a process tries to access a securable object, the system checks the ACEs in the object's DACL to determine whether or not to grant access. If an object does NOT have a DACL, then the system will grant full access to everyone, but if the DACL has no ACE entries, the system will deny all access attempts. ACEs in the DACL are checked in sequence until a match is found that allows the requested rights or until access is denied.
- System Access Control Lists (SACL)-:Allows for administrators to log access attempts that are made to secured objects. ACEs specify the types of access attempts that cause the system to generate a record in the security event log.
- Fully Qualified Domain-: An FQDN is the complete name for a specific computer or host. It is written with the hostname and domain name in the format [host name].[domain name].[tld]. This is used to specify an object's location in the tree hierarchy of DNS. The FQDN can be used to locate hosts in an Active Directory without knowing the IP address, much like when browsing to a website such as google.com instead of typing in the associated IP address. An example would be the host DC01 in the domain INLANEFREIGHT.LOCAL. The FQDN here would be DC01.INLANEFREIGHT.LOCAL.
- Tombstone-: A tombstone is a container object in AD that holds deleted AD objects. When an object is deleted from AD, the object remains for a set period of time known as the Tombstone Lifetime, and the isDeleted attribute is set to TRUE. Once an object exceeds the Tombstone Lifetime, it will be entirely removed. Microsoft recommends a tombstone lifetime of 180 days to increase the usefulness of backups, but this value may differ across environments. Depending on the DC operating system version, this value will default to 60 or 180 days. If an object is deleted in a domain that does not have an AD Recycle Bin, it will become a tombstone object and the object is stripped of its attributes.
- AD Recycle Bin-: The AD Recycle Bin was first introduced in Windows Server 2008 R2 to facilitate the recovery of deleted AD objects. This made it easier for sysadmins to restore objects, avoiding the need to restore from backups, restarting Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS), or rebooting a Domain Controller. When the AD Recycle Bin is enabled, any deleted objects are preserved for a period of time, facilitating restoration if needed. Sysadmins can set how long an object remains in a deleted, recoverable state. If this is not specified, the object will be restorable for a default value of 60 days. The biggest advantage of using the AD Recycle Bin is that most of a deleted object's attributes are preserved, which makes it far easier to fully restore a deleted object to its previous state.
- SYSVOL-: The SYSVOL folder, or share, stores copies of public files in the domain such as system policies, Group Policy settings, logon/logoff scripts, and often contains other types of scripts that are executed to perform various tasks in the AD environment. The contents of the SYSVOL folder are replicated to all DCs within the environment using File Replication Services (FRS). You can read more about the SYSVOL structure here.
- NTSDS.dit-: The NTDS.DIT file can be considered the heart of Active Directory. It is stored on a Domain Controller at C:\Windows\NTDS\ and is a database that stores AD data such as information about user and group objects, group membership, and, most important to attackers and penetration testers, the password hashes for all users in the domain. Once full domain compromise is reached, an attacker can retrieve this file, extract the hashes, and either use them to perform a pass-the-hash attack or crack them offline using a tool such as Hashcat to access additional resources in the domain. If the setting Store password with reversible encryption is enabled, then the NTDS.DIT will also store the cleartext passwords for all users created or who changed their password after this policy was set. While rare, some organizations may enable this setting if they use applications or protocols that need to use a user's existing password (and not Kerberos) for authentication.
- MSBROWSE is a Microsoft networking protocol that was used in early versions of Windows-based local area networks (LANs) to provide browsing services. It was used to maintain a list of resources, such as shared printers and files, that were available on the network, and to allow users to easily browse and access these resources.In older version of Windows we could use nbtstat -A ip-address to search for the Master Browser. If we see MSBROWSE it means that's the Master Browser. Aditionally we could use nltest utility to query a Windows Master Browser for the names of the Domain Controllers.Today, MSBROWSE is largely obsolete and is no longer in widespread use. Modern Windows-based LANs use the Server Message Block (SMB) protocol for file and printer sharing, and the Common Internet File System (CIFS) protocol for browsing services.
- adminCount:The adminCount attribute determines whether or not the SDProp process protects a user. If the value is set to 0 or not specified, the user is not protected. If the attribute value is set to 1, the user is protected. Attackers will often look for accounts with the adminCount attribute set to 1 to target in an internal environment. These are often privileged accounts and may lead to further access or full domain compromise.
- Active Directory Users and Computers (ADUC)-:ADUC is a GUI console commonly used for managing users, groups, computers, and contacts in AD. Changes made in ADUC can be done via PowerShell as well.

- ADSI Edit-:ADSI Edit is a GUI tool used to manage objects in AD. It provides access to far more than is available in ADUC and can be used to set or delete any attribute available on an object, add, remove, and move objects as well. It is a powerful tool that allows a user to access AD at a much deeper level. Great care should be taken when using this tool, as changes here could cause major problems in AD.

-----------

### Active DIrectory Objects

------------

- An object can be defined as  any resource present in an active directory e.g OUs,printers, users, domain controllers.
- These are the users within the organization's AD environment. Users are considered leaf objects, which means that they cannot contain any other objects within them. Another example of a leaf object is a mailbox in Microsoft Exchange. A user object is considered a security principal and has a security identifier (SID) and a global unique identifier (GUID). User objects have many possible attributes, such as their display name, last login time, date of last password change, email address, account description, manager, address, and more.They are a crucial target for attackers since gaining access to even a low privileged user can grant access to many objects and resources and allow for detailed enumeration of the entire domain (or forest).
- Contacts-:A contact object is usually used to represent an external user and contains informational attributes such as first name, last name, email address, telephone number, etc. They are leaf objects and are NOT security principals (securable objects), so they don't have a SID, only a GUID. An example would be a contact card for a third-party vendor or a customer.
- A printer object points to a printer accessible within the AD network. Like a contact, a printer is a leaf object and not a security principal, so it only has a GUID. Printers have attributes such as the printer's name, driver information, port number, etc.
- A computer object is any computer joined to the AD network (workstation or server). Computers are leaf objects because they do not contain other objects. However, they are considered security principals and have a SID and a GUID. Like users, they are prime targets for attackers since full administrative access to a computer (as the all-powerful NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM account) grants similar rights to a standard domain user and can be used to perform the majority of the enumeration tasks that a user account can (save for a few exceptions across domain trusts.)
- A shared folder object points to a shared folder on the specific computer where the folder resides. Shared folders can have stringent access control applied to them and can be either accessible to everyone (even those without a valid AD account), open to only authenticated users (which means anyone with even the lowest privileged user account OR a computer account (NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM) could access it), or be locked down to only allow certain users/groups access. Anyone not explicitly allowed access will be denied from listing or reading its contents. Shared folders are NOT security principals and only have a GUID. A shared folder's attributes can include the name, location on the system, security access rights.
- Groups-: A group is considered a container object because it can contain other objects, including users, computers, and even other groups. A group IS regarded as a security principal and has a SID and a GUID. In AD, groups are a way to manage user permissions and access to other securable objects (both users and computers). Let's say we want to give 20 help desk users access to the Remote Management Users group on a jump host. Instead of adding the users one by one, we could add the group, and the users would inherit the intended permissions via their membership in the group. In Active Directory, we commonly see what are called "nested groups" (a group added as a member of another group), which can lead to a user(s) obtaining unintended rights. Nested group membership is something we see and often leverage during penetration tests. The tool BloodHound helps to discover attack paths within a network and illustrate them in a graphical interface. It is excellent for auditing group membership and uncovering/seeing the sometimes unintended impacts of nested group membership. Groups in AD can have many attributes, the most common being the name, description, membership, and other groups that the group belongs to. Many other attributes can be set, which we will discuss more in-depth later in this module.
- Organizational Units-: 
- Built-in-:In AD, built-in is a container that holds default groups in an AD domain. They are predefined when an AD domain is created.
